#1

Disney to buy Star Wars production company Lucasfilm for $4bn

Creator of the Star Wars films, George Lucas, signs an agreement to sell his company, Lucasfilm, to the Walt Disney Company who will make further films in the series. 

Disney has announced its purchase of Lucasfilm, the maker of Star Wars, in a $4.05bn (£2.5bn) deal that will pave the way for a new series of Star Wars feature films.

In a move that prompted excitement and speculation among sci-fi fans, Disney said the plan is to release a new Star Wars film every two to three years after bringing out Star Wars Episode 7 in 2015.

George Lucas, who founded Lucasfilm in 1971 before enhancing his name with other worldwide hits such as the Indiana Jones franchise, is a filmmaker known for exercising control over the most minute details of the fictional universe he created. So it was not a surprise to hear that Lucas will remain as a creative consultant on the new Star Wars films.

"For the past 35 years, one of my greatest pleasures has been to see Star Wars passed from one generation to the next," he said.

"It's now time for me to pass Star Wars on to a new generation of filmmakers. I've always believed that Star Wars could live beyond me, and I thought it was important to set up the transition during my lifetime." 

#2 

Anatolian philosophers' doctrines converted into music

Helding the philosophy of some of Anatolia’s most beloved mystics with more modern sounds including jazz and classical Turkish music, the Rumi Project is a new musical group set for a series of concerts that will be multilingual in addition to bending genres.

The aim of the band is to combine the philosophy of Rumi with ethnic sounds, having brought together six Turkish and two English poems of Rumi with ethnic jazz music in a spiritual musical show.

According to Akan Taşkolu, creator of the unique project which began in 2009, the initial aim was to set Rumi’s works to music. With time, he discovered other Anatolian philosophers such as Shams Tabrizi, Yunus Emre and Hacı Bektaş Veli, who lived in Anatolia during the 13th century.

“The project became a very magnificent one with these 13th-century philosophers,” Taşkolu said.

The band’s first album, “Separation,” contains many modern and jazz-fusion tunes along with spiritual music in a total of eight works. The words are by Rumi and the music by Taşkolu. Produced within the format of Western music, Taşkolu said there were many examples of Western music formats in the production but that classical Turkish instruments produce the sounds. As such, some songs reflect an Irish musical style, another is jazz or Latin, while an up-tempo song is followed by a classical Turkish melody. The group has also drawn attention for performing numbers that change mid-song.

The production and arrangements are handled by Taşkolu, who is supported by a band of eight members with Çağdaş Yamen and Müge Sarıkurt as soloists. Guitarist Muzaffer Güner, accordionist Edward Aris, cellist Nigün Dülger, percussionist Halil Zünbüloğlu, trumpeter Ari Aris and violinists Turay Dinleyen and Aydan Tunalı all contributed to the album, which also features famous reed artist Suren Asaduryan as a guest performer.

Each member of the band is a professional musician that each continue to perfect their core musical styles while contributing to the project.

Philosophical approach of Rumi

According to experts, Rumi was an evolutionary thinker in the sense that he believed that the spirit after devolution from the divine ego underwent an evolutionary process by which it comes nearer and nearer to the same divine ego. All matter in the universe obeys this law and this movement is due to an inbuilt urge (which Rumi calls “love”) to evolve and seek enjoinment with the divinity from which it has emerged. Evolution into a human being from an animal is only one stage in this process. The doctrine of the fall of Adam is reinterpreted as the devolution of the ego from the universal ground of divinity and is a universal, cosmic phenomenon. For Rumi, God is the ground as well as the goal of all existence.

However, Rumi need not be considered a biological evolutionary creationist. In light of the fact that Rumi lived hundreds of years before Darwin and was not interested in scientific theories, it is probable to conclude that he did not deal with biological evolution at all. Rather, he was concerned with the spiritual evolution of a human being and believed that man not conscious of God was akin to an animal and that true consciousness made him divine.

English academic Reynold Nicholson has called this a Neo-Platonic doctrine, in the sense of the universal soul working through the various spheres of being, and one introduced to Islam by Muslim philosophers like al-Farabi and related to Avicenna’s idea of love.

 #3 

Pink Tops Pop Charts with 'The Truth About Love' 

Pink is back on the charts with a new album that set a career record for the pop-rock singer. 

The Truth About Love is Pink’s first studio album since 2008.  She says the new songs show that she’s still the “feisty, angry girl she’s always been,” but admits they also give fans a look at her kinder and more vulnerable side.  Pink credits the softening of her emotions to the 2010 reconciliation with husband Carey Hart and birth of their daughter Willow the following year.

The Truth About Love features a few guest vocalists, including Detroit rapper Eminem, British pop singer Lily Allen and Fun’s Nate Ruess.  Pink co-wrote each of the 13 tracks on the album, including its lead single, “Blow Me (One Last Kiss)" which became a Top Five hit on the Billboard Hot 100 chart. 

Pink earned her first Number One album on Billboard’s Top 200 chart with The Truth About Love.  The album sold more than 280,000 copies its first week of release, which makes it the fourth highest-selling debut of 2012.  According to Nielsen SoundScan, only Justin Bieber, Madonna and Mumford & Sons had stronger first-week sales this year.  Pink responded to the news by posting on Twitter, “After 13 years and six records, I’m beyond floored to have a Number One album in the U.S.  I’m grateful for all the ears and all the hearts.  Thank you!!”

Pink recently announced that she’ll kick off her first U.S. tour in four years next February.  She’s scheduled to follow the North American trek with 27 European concerts and 12 shows in Australia.  Pink says she’s looking forward to showing her 15-month-old daughter the world. 

#4 

The Turkish province of Malatya welcomes its third annual international film festival on Friday.

The Third Malatya International Film Festival, running through to Nov. 15, promises a packed program of close to 140 titles for movie buffs in this eastern Anatolian province.

The overall theme of this year’s event is “Ortadoğu ve Barış” (Mideast and Peace), and a selection of films by Middle Eastern directors will be offered in a special section in the program. Other sections on the bill include Tribute to Masters, Chinese Cinema, Fright Night, Short Films from the World, Children’s Films and three sections devoted to films by Tahmineh Milani, John Sayles and the late Turkish filmmaker Seyfi Teoman.

Iranian female filmmaker Milani and American independent director Sayles are among the international guests of this year’s festival. Milani will preside over the festival’s five-member international feature film competition jury and Sayles, who will receive one the festival’s honor awards during its opening gala, will present four of his 17 films.

Also honored at Friday’s opening ceremony at the Malatya Congress Center will be four veterans of Turkish cinema: Actor Münir Özkul and scriptwriter and film producer Türker İnanoğlu will receive the 2012 festival’s lifetime achievement awards while Yeşilçam actors Kadir İnanır and Türkan Şoray will receive the honor awards.

The five-member jury headed by Milani will be judging the 10 titles in the international competition while the national competition, also made up of 10 films, will be evaluated by another five-member jury to be chaired by Turkish scriptwriter and director Biket İlhan.

“Ateşin Düştüğü Yer” (Where the Fire Burns), Turkey’s entrant in this year’s Oscar race for the Best Foreign Language Film Academy Award, is among the films in the running for Malatya’s Crystal Apricot awards in the national competition. Other titles on the bill include “Babamın Sesi” (The Voice of My Father), “Lal Gece” (Silent Night) and “Tepenin Ardı” (Beyond the Hill).

The festival’s third competitive section, the national short film competition, will feature 15 shorts. “Amour” by Michael Haneke, “A Better Life” by Cedric Kahn, “Barbara” by Christian Petzold, “Beyond The Hills” by Christian Mungiu and “Chicken with Plums” by Vincent Paronnaud are among international festival favorites to be featured out of competition. 

#5 

Louvre puts ‘stolen’ Turkish tiles on display at Islamic Arts Gallery show 

All of the tiles that are being displayed at an exhibition at the Islamic Arts Gallery at Paris’ Louvre Museum have been stolen from Turkey, according to officials from Turkey’s Culture Ministry.

The ministry arrived at the conclusion after sending two officials to the Louvre exhibition to take surreptitious photos of the artifacts; after analyzing the pictures, the ministry determined that the tiles were stolen from the Piyalepaşa Mosque at the end of the 19th century. Other unique tiles in the exhibition include ones from the tombs of Selim II, Murat III and Eyüp Sultan and the Mahmud I Library in Turkey.

The Louvre, however, denies that the pieces belong to the Piyalepaşa Mosque.

The Piyalepaşa Mosque, which was built in 1573 in Istanbul’s Kasımpaşa neighborhood by Kaptan-ı Derya Piyale Paşa, one of the son-in-laws of Sultan Selim II, was decorated with the most beautiful tiles at the time. The tiles were particularly placed in the shrine and upper parts of the shrine walls, while there was also tiled writing between the second and third window lines of the shine. Today, none of those tiles and panels in the windows remain in the mosque.

Three panels from the Piyalepaşa Mosque were seen in the exhibition at the Louvre Islamic Arts Gallery, which opened on Sept. 22.

Muslim countries footed more than half the bill for the creation of the Islamic Arts Gallery, with Saudi Arabia donating $22 million while Morocco, Kuwait, Azerbaijan and others donated $33 million in total.
The gallery, located on an area of 2,800 square meters in the Visconti yard of the Louvre Museum, is exhibiting 3,000 pieces from the 15,000-piece Louvre collection and 3,400 pieces from the 15,000-piece Musée des Arts Décoratifs collection, as well as many artifacts from Turkey, the report from the two Culture Ministry officials said. 

#6 

Pamuk decorated with France’s order of merit at Paris ceremony

France presented Turkey’s Nobel laureate author Orhan Pamuk with the Legion d’honneur order of merit Oct. 29 at a ceremony held in the French Culture Ministry in Paris.

French Minister of Culture and Communication Aurelie Filippetti presented the order of merit to Pamuk on behalf of his country and praised Pamuk, saying he was a distinguished author whose books have been translated into many languages and were read by millions across the globe.

She said she was especially touched by the author’s stories with an Istanbul theme. “Because of [your] Istanbul stories, I compare you to the French author Victor Hugo and your stories to “Les Miserables.” You look familiar in this sense.”

Pamuk said he was the only member of his family who didn’t speak French. “I have read French novels and looked at French paintings,” he said.

Touching on Turkish-French relations, Pamuk stressed the Ottoman-Turks looked at France as a model in political westernization.

Following the speeches, the French minister presented Pamuk with the order of merit.

Among the ceremony attendees was Turkey’s permanent representative to UNESCO Gürcan Türkoğlu, Paris Embassy officials along with Turkish and French guests.

On Oct. 26 Pamuk also received the Sonning Prize, Denmark’s highest cultural award, for his contribution to European culture in a ceremony at the University of Copenhagen.

In a recent article written for British daily the Guardian under the headline “Europe is turning away from Turkey and the rest of the world,” Pamuk criticized Europe, saying Europe had erected walls at its borders and was gradually turning away from the world.

“As the slogan of liberte, egalite, fraternite is slowly forgotten, Europe will sadly turn into an increasingly conservative place dominated by religious and ethnic identities,” Pamuk wrote. 

#7 

November full of stars in Istanbul 
Istanbul will welcome a range of global music stars this month, with visits scheduled from artists who run the gamut from pop to metal to classical.

On Nov. 10 the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra will be on stage at Haliç Congress Center, followed a day later by Thin Lizzy at Küçükçiftlik Park as part of the Avea Music Concert. W.A.S.P. continues the lineup at Maçka Küçükçiftlik Park on Nov. 25, while Sting will conclude the month of music with his long-awaited concert at Ataköy Track and Field Hall.

Jennifer Lopez will perform at Ülker Sports Arena on Nov. 16 and has also agreed to a Nov. 17 encore performance following her highly anticipated initial show, according to concert organizers. A total of 5,000 tickets for the upcoming Lopez concert were sold out within the first five days they were available.

Lopez will sing new songs from her latest album, “Love.” Given her reputation for high-energy stage shows, expectations are high, though it remains uncertain whether Enrique Iglesias, who has been performing with Lopez on her “Dance Again” world tour, will be accompanying her.

The Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra

The Istanbul Foundation for Culture and Arts (İKSV) will be hosting one of the world’s greatest orchestras, the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra, on Nov. 10 at the Haliç Congress Center as part of the 400th anniversary of the establishment of diplomatic relations between Turkey and the Netherlands.

One of the main cultural ambassadors for the Netherlands, the Royal Concertgebouw Orchestra consists of 120 virtuosos who will be conducted by Lorin Maazel of the United States, the chief conductor of the Munich Philharmonic this season.

The orchestra enjoyed a close relationship with Gustav Mahler and championed many of his symphonies, even performing his work at the Mahler Festival. Other conductors who have worked with the Concertgebouw Orchestra included Pierre Monteux, Eugen Jochum, George Szell and Kirill Kondrashin, who was the permanent guest conductor from 1978 to 1981. More recently, Nikolaus Harnoncourt was named honorary guest conductor in 2000.

Sting takes the stage at Ataköy

Sting last came to Turkey in 2006 to perform for 15,000 fans at Kuruçeşme Arena. This time he will appear at the Ataköy Athletizm Arena with a five-piece band consisting of Dominic Miller on guitar, Vinnie Colaiuta on drums, David Sancious on keyboards, Peter Tickell on electric fiddle and Jo Lawry on backup vocals. Sting will visit Istanbul as a part of his Back to Bass Fall 2012 Tour. The singer has varied his musical style throughout his career, incorporating distinct elements of jazz, reggae, classical, new age, and world-beat into his music. As a solo musician and member of The Police, Sting received 16 Grammy Awards for his work, receiving his first Grammy for best rock instrumental performance in 1981.

The artist also has three Brit Awards, including one for best British male in 1994, a Golden Globe, an Emmy Award, and several Oscar nominations for best original song under his belt. He is a member of both the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame and the Songwriters Hall of Fame. 

#8 

Portraits depict golden children of Europe 

The Suna and İnan Kıraç Foundation of Pera Museum will present an exclusive selection from Spain’s Yannick and Ben Jakober Foundation’s Portraits of Children Collection titled “Golden Children: 16th and 19th Century European Portraits.”

The exhibition, composed of 55 stunning portraits of children, explores the world of royalty and aristocracy from different European countries and generations. A portrait of Cameria (Mihrimah), daughter of Sultan Süleyman the Magnificent and Hürrem Sultan, from the Jakober Foundation’s Collection as well as a portrait of Prince Abdürrahim Efendi, an Ottoman prince from the Suna and İnan Kıraç Foundation’s Orientalist Painting Collection, have been added to the exhibition as figures representing the Ottoman Dynasty.

The subjects of the paintings were notable royalty or aristocracy and the court portraits circulated in Europe to bring about marriages that would often change the course of history. There are also some provincial and naive works, but all give viewers a deeper insight into the past. Whether these children are English, Italian, Danish, Spanish, German, Polish, Flemish, Dutch or French, beneath all the trappings of their sumptuous attire – fine lace, jewels and protective amulets – the portraits depict the early years of historical figures.

The story of the Spanish collection began in the 1970s when Yannick Vu was able to acquire a painting titled “Girl with Cherries” by the Mallorquin painter Juan Mestre I Bosch (1826-1893). What was at first considered decorative art for he and his wife soon became a passion that evolved into a collection of more than 160 portraits of children.

 “Golden Children, 16th - 19th Century European Portraits” reflect the time and geographical areas it represents, giving viewers the opportunity to contemplate not only European political history through some of its protagonists over the course of four centuries but also a look into the traditions, superstitions, symbolic language, strategies of representation and the fashions of each era and each country.

“If collecting is the act of bringing things together, then the collector is the person who reunites what has been dispersed by the passage of time, thus putting some order in the world that surrounds him.

The search for an object is born out of the collector’s own concerns and experience and for him or her building up a collection is basically about trying to find the link between all the pieces he has chosen.

Collecting can be a passionate game or a neurosis, a way of denying death. If the collector is also an artist, he or she can use the collection as another form of creativity. Perceiving or discovering a common element among so many forms of expressions in the work of those who preceded him, somehow becomes his or her own vision,” Vu said of his collection.

The exhibition, which opened on Oct. 13, will be on display until Jan. 6, 2013.

Educational programs for children

The Pera Museum is also offering educational programs for children between the ages of 4 and 14. The programs “Golden Children” and “Art for Two” offer children the opportunity to closely study the collection. After learning about the classical childrens portraits and contemporary art, children can use their creativity and the insights they gathered from the exhibition during the workshops. Children will also have the opportunity to develop their own projects using different materials and techniques under the guidance of artist and instructor Leyla Sakpınar. 

#9 

Two rival publishing houses combine job 

British publisher Pearson said yesterday it had agreed to merge its Penguin books division with English-language rival Random House, owned by German media giant Bertelsmann.

Penguin and Random House will combine their businesses in a newly-created joint venture named Penguin Random House, said a statement. Bertelsmann would own 53 percent of the joint venture and Pearson 47 percent.The tie-up was expected to complete in next years.

World’s leading publishers

“The combination brings together two of the world’s leading English language publishers, with highly complementary skills and strengths,” the statement said.

“Random House is the leading English language publisher in the United States and the United Kingdom, while Penguin is the world’s most famous publishing brand and has a strong presence in fast-growing developing markets.”

Bertelsmann was to nominate five directors to the board of Penguin Random House and Pearson four. John Makinson, currently chairman and chief executive of Penguin, was to be chairman of Penguin Random House and Markus Dohle, currently chief executive of Random House, its chief executive.
“Our new company will bring together the publishing expertise, experience, and skill sets of two of the world’s most successful, enduring trade book publishers,” said Dohle. “In doing so, we will create a publishing home that gives employees, authors, agents, and booksellers access to unprecedented resources.”

Marjorie Scardino, the outgoing chief executive of Pearson, added: “The two publishers will share a large part of their costs, to invest more for their author and reader constituencies and to be more adventurous in trying new models in this exciting, fast-moving world of digital books and digital readers.” The joint venture excludes Bertelsmann’s trade publishing business in Germany, while Pearson was to retain rights to use the Penguin brand in education markets worldwide. 

#10 

International Istanbul Book Fair’s program launched

The fair will be held at the TÜYAP Fair and Congress Center next month.

The fair will be held at the TÜYAP Fair and Congress Center next month.
Book worms will find no shortage of things to keep them occupied during this year’s 31st International Istanbul Book Fair, as organizers announce 200 events on the fair’s program schedule. Organized by the TÜYAP Fair Management in collaboration with the Turkish Publishers’ House, the book fair will see 600 publishing houses and non-governmental organizations converge from Nov. 17 to Nov. 25 at the TÜYAP Fair and Congress Center.

Turkish writer, Gülten Dayıoğlu, will be the guest of honor at the fair, whose theme is “My Childhood is my Country: Children’s and Youth literature.” There will be panel discussions and talks on child literature during the event.

This year the Netherlands has been chosen as the fair’s country of honor. Dutch culture and literature will be presented and discussed in a variety of interviews, panel discussions, illustration workshops, professional meetings and an exhibition in the International Hall. Among the fair’s guests will be one of the best known illustrators of the Netherlands, Marit Tornqvist, and historian Erik Jan Zürcher.

In addition to a Dutch National Pavilion, an additional 15 publishers of children’s and youth literature
as well as general literature will take part in the fair. 
