#1

Climate Information Can Protect Public Health 

Climate information and weather forecasts can help prevent or prepare ways to offset disease epidemics and improve health, according to a new U.N. report.  The World Meteorological Organization and World Health Organization have published the first Atlas of Health and Climate.

The World Meteorological Organization says climate change is altering the magnitude, frequency and duration of extreme weather events.  As the world's climate continues to change, it warns hazards to human health are increasing.

WMO scientists note droughts, floods and cyclones affect the health of millions of people each year.  Climate variability and extreme conditions such as floods can trigger epidemics of diseases, such as diarrhea, malaria, dengue and meningitis-diseases, which cause death and suffering for millions of people.

WMO Secretary-General Michel Jarraud says climate services have been under-utilized for public health.  He says the Atlas of Health and Climate shows stronger cooperation between the meteorological and health communities can affect the health of societies in a profound way.

"Let me give you an example which is more directly related to the work of WMO," said Jarraud. "Climate information about the risk of floods and cyclones, which is routinely prepared by national meteorological services, involve millions of peoples around the world."

Director-General of the World Health Organization, Margaret Chan says her organization enthusiastically embraces collaboration with the World Meteorological Organization.   Much WHO work is focused in Africa, and Dr. Chan says climate predictions are having a beneficial impact on health in sub-Saharan Africa.  

For example, she says every year hot and dusty winds blow across the meningitis belt that covers 20 countries in sub-Saharan Africa.  She says every year many children under age 15 die or are mentally damaged from this terrible disease.

"What we do now is in advance of the coming of the wind, because of this climate information it allows us to do early warnings," said Chan. "So, what do we do?  We pre-position and make sure that a vaccination campaign takes place before the coming of the wind so children are protected.  So, that is one specific example."  

The Atlas has numerous maps, tables and graphs that make the links between health and climate more explicit.  It notes in some locations the incidence of infectious diseases vary depending on weather and climate conditions.  It says stronger climate services in endemic countries can help predict the onset, intensity and duration of epidemics.

The Atlas presents many case studies, one of the most dramatic examples of how climate preparation can save lives occurred in Bangladesh.  In 1970, about half a million people lost their lives in cyclones that hit Bangladesh.  Thanks to improved early warning systems and preparedness, the cyclone death toll in 2007 was reduced to 3,000. 

#2

Nigeria Tackles Maternal Mortality 

For many women in Nigeria, a country with one of the highest maternal death rates in the world, the prospect of giving birth can be scary.
 
According to the U.N. children’s organization, UNICEF, more than 150 women die every day in pregnancy-related cases in Nigeria, an average of one death every 10 minutes.
 
It’s no wonder many pregnant women worry about coming out of the hospital or clinic alive.
 
“I asked my family members to embark on prayers for me,” says Eldina Istifanus, a mother of two. “I am sure that is why I am alive today.
 
“I almost died of childbirth complications during my first delivery,” she says. “I was afraid during my second delivery. I remembered my first experience and the experience of my friends who died in the process.”
 
Despite her fears, Istifanus counts herself lucky because she was in a private clinic.
 
“The situation is very bad in public hospitals,” she says. “The workers are not motivated and emergency services are almost absent. I don’t know what would have happened to me if I had gone there.”
 
Even though Nigeria’s maternal mortality statistics are among the world’s worst, doctors say the situation may be more dire than numbers indicate. Because the country has no standardized recordkeeping practices in rural communities and settlements — places where women rarely visit a hospital or clinic for pre-natal care or delivery — many pregnancy-related deaths, doctors say, are preventable.
 
What’s worse: While many of Nigeria’s public hospitals are ill-equipped and under-staffed, rural areas have few health facilities to speak of.

 State government interventions
 
A number of Nigeria's state governments are opening primary health-care clinics and offering free medical services to pregnant women and children under the age of five.
 
In Kaduna state, Health Commissioner Turaki Khalid says the program has increased demand for health care.
 
“More than five million pregnant women and children below the age of five years have benefitted from the program introduced in 2007,” he said.
 
But Dorcas Adeyemi, an activist for maternal health care, says the state government needs to get new laws passed.
 
“Most of these state governments are running this program without the required laws to back them up,” Adeyemi said. “They should be more committed by enacting laws that support it.”
 
The Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation has a project called the Nigerian Urban Reproductive Health Initiative (NURHI) that is working with the Nigerian government to reduce maternal deaths.
 
Kabir Abdullahi, leader of the Gates project in Kaduna state, says even helping women space out their births through enlightenment and provision of family planning services can reduce maternal deaths by as much as 30 percent.
 
“We are encouraging state governments in Nigeria to create budget lines for family planning commodities and services to reduce the country’s high maternal and child deaths,” Abdullahi said.
 
Current efforts indicate that Nigeria is making progress in reducing its maternal mortality rates, but the pace is too slow for the country to attain the Millennium Development Goals of reducing maternal mortality by a third by 2015.

#3

Should I eat breakfast?

Up to two-thirds of us skip the first meal of the day but nutritionists say we should breakfast like kings and eat less later. There is some research that links eating a good breakfast with a reduction in the risk of obesity, diabetes and heart disease. While it's tempting to miss breakfast when you're on a diet, it's not clear that this helps you to lose weight.

Last week a research team from Imperial College London presented its findings at the Neuroscience 2012 conference. The researchers scanned the brains of 21 healthy people as they showed them a variety of foods including chocolate, pizza and salad. They compared how attractive the foods were to people, as well as how much they ate for lunch after the scan on two days, one on which breakfast was missed and one on which they ate a large breakfast (750 calories). The researchers found that missing breakfast increased the appeal of high-calorie foods (as measured by increased orbital frontal cortex activity on the brain scan) and that people ate about 250 calories more at lunch. The researchers said this shows breakfast takes the edge off our appetite so we don't crave high-calorie foods. So, how should we be starting our days?
The solution

Studies have come up with a variety of suitable breakfast foods. There is some evidence in favour of the full English version (on the basis that eating fats primes the metabolism to be more efficient for the rest of the day). However, that study was done on mice and is not convincing – although the mice who ate a good breakfast were less likely to get chubby.

Chocolate cake is recommended by researchers from Tel Aviv University who found that a 600-calorie breakfast with proteins and carbohydrates, including a sweet treat, controlled cravings for sweet things for the rest of the day and kickstarted the body's metabolism. Their study looked at 193 obese people over 32 weeks and found those who ate sweet things at breakfast lost an average of 40lb more than those who didn't.

A study in the US journal Pediatrics of more than 2,000 teenagers found that a quarter missed breakfast but that those who ate it were on average five pounds lighter (and ironically less likely to have been dieting) than those who didn't.

However, it is always hard to prove cause and effect in dieting studies. People who eat breakfast often turn out to take more exercise and drink less alcohol so there may be other reasons for their weight loss.

A review of the research that added up results of nine studies on the relationship between eating breakfast cereals and weight, found that children and adults who regularly ate breakfast cereals (the study was funded by Kellogg's) were less likely to be overweight than those who did not eat them. The authors say this doesn't provide proof that cereals help you stay slim and that there was no evidence that their cereal eaters ate less throughout the day.

So, although eating breakfast is linked with being slimmer, this may simply be an association. There is, however, another more robust body of evidence that suggests children benefit from eating breakfast because it helps them to concentrate.

#4

Study: Multivitamins may lower cancer risk in men

America’s favorite dietary supplements, multivitamins, modestly lowered the risk for cancer in healthy male doctors who took them for more than a decade, the first large study to test these pills has found.

The result is a surprise because many studies of individual vitamins have found they don’t help prevent chronic diseases and some even seemed to raise the risk of cancer.

In the new study, multivitamins cut the chance of developing cancer by 8 percent. That is less effective than a good diet, exercise and not smoking, each of which can lower cancer risk by 20 percent to 30 percent, cancer experts say. Multivitamins also may have different results in women, younger men or people less healthy than those in this study.

“It’s a very mild effect and personally I’m not sure it’s significant enough to recommend to anyone” although it is promising, said Dr. Ernest Hawk, vice president of cancer prevention at the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center and formerly of the National Cancer Institute.

“At least this doesn’t suggest a harm” as some previous studies on single vitamins have, he said.

Hawk reviewed the study for the American Association for Cancer Research, which is meeting in Anaheim, Calif., where the study was to be presented on Wednesday. It also was published online in the Journal of the American Medical Association.

About one-third of US adults and as many as half of those over 50 take multivitamins. They are marketed as a kind of insurance policy against bad eating. Yet no government agency recommends their routine use “regardless of the quality of a person’s diet,” says a fact sheet from the federal Office of Dietary Supplements.

Some fads, such as the antioxidant craze over vitamins A and E and beta-carotene, backfired when studies found more health risk with those supplements, not less. Many of those were single vitamins in larger doses than the “100 percent of daily value” amounts that multivitamins typically contain.

Science on vitamins has been skimpy. Most studies have been observational -- they look at groups of people who do and do not use vitamins, a method that can’t give firm conclusions.

Dr. J. Michael Gaziano, of Brigham and Women’s Hospital and VA Boston, led a stronger test. Nearly 15,000 male doctors who were 50 or older and free of cancer when the study started were given monthly packets of Centrum Silver or fake multivitamins without knowing which type they received. After about 11 years, there were 2,669 new cancers, and some people had cancer more than once. For every 1,000 men per year in the study, there were 17 cancers among multivitamin users and more than 18 among those taking the placebo pills. That worked out to an 8 percent lower risk of developing cancer in the vitamin group. Multivitamins made no difference in the risk of developing prostate cancer, which accounted for half of all cases. They lowered the risk of other cancers collectively by about 12 percent. There also was a trend toward fewer cancer deaths among multivitamin users, but the difference was so small it could have occurred by chance alone. Side effects were fairly similar except for more rashes among vitamin users. The National Institutes of Health paid for most of the study. Pfizer Inc. supplied the pills and other companies supplied the packaging.

The main reason to take a multivitamin is to correct or prevent a deficiency, “but there may be a modest benefit in reducing the risk of cancer in older men,” Gaziano said.

Cancer experts said the results need to be confirmed by another study before recommending multivitamins to the public. These participants were healthier -- only 4 percent smoked, for example.

For people who do want to take multivitamins, doctors suggest:

 Be aware that they are dietary supplements, which do not get the strict testing required of prescription medicines.

 Ask your doctor before taking any. Vitamin K can interfere with common heart medicines and blood thinners, and vitamins C and E can lower the effectiveness of some types of chemotherapy. For people having surgery, some vitamins affect bleeding and response to anesthesia.

 Current and former smokers should avoid multivitamins with lots of beta-carotene or vitamin A; two studies have tied them to increased risk of lung cancer.

#5

Physicians warn of influenza in Turkey

As flu season approaches, Turkish physicians are advising the public on ways to avoid influenza, along with giving advice on identifying and treating the frequently severe and potentially fatal disease.

An increase in the number of influenza cases occurs during autumn and winter in temperate regions all over the world. Although recovery from influenza can be fast and easy, it can also result in hospitalization and even death among people in high-risk groups, such as the very young, the elderly and the chronically ill.

Engin Yurt, a specialist at Medicana Hospital, told Sunday's Zaman that an outbreak of influenza is likely with changes in air temperature, especially in transition to the autumn and winter seasons. “We suggest people get medical treatment when symptoms such as breathing difficulty, coughing up green or yellow phlegm or severe headaches appear,” added Yurt. However, he went on to warn people not to use antibiotics without a doctor's prescription, and emphasized that over-the-counter drugs may do more harm than good.

According to pediatrician Hamza Yazgan from Fatih University Sema Clinical Research and Treatment Center, there may be a gradual increase in the number of influenza cases seen by hospitals. “The number of people who suffer from influenza is gradually increasing in our hospital. Seasonal influenza spreads easily and can be potent in crowded areas such as schools, nursing homes or businesses and towns. When an infected person coughs, infected droplets get into the air and another person can breathe them in and be exposed. The virus can also be spread by hands infected with the virus. We suggest people avoid close contact with people who are sick and stay at home to prevent others from catching your illness,” stated Yazgan.

Noting that germs are often spread when a person touches their eyes, nose or mouth, microbiology specialist Hülya Çaşkurlu stated that after touching something contaminated hand-washing is very effective in protecting from germs. “Getting plenty of sleep, drinking fluids and eating nutritious food will also help us keep healthy,” she added. She also recommends annual vaccinations, especially for the elderly, people with chronic medical conditions, health care workers and children aged six months to two years.

“Most people recover from fever and other symptoms of influenza, such as the sudden onset of high fever, cough, headache, muscle and joint pain, severe malaise, sore throat and runny nose, within a week, without requiring medical attention,” said Çaşkurlu.

According to data released by the World Health Organization (WHO), annual influenza epidemics result in about 3 to 5 million cases of severe illness and approximately 250,000 to 500,000 deaths. Vaccines can prevent 70 to 90 percent of influenza-specific illness among healthy adults and reduce severe illnesses and complications by up to 60 percent, as well as incidence of death by 80 percent among the elderly.

According to data from the Social Security Institution (SGK), projects are being run along with the Ministry of Health to inform people about influenza and raise awareness among the general public. Moreover, seasonal influenza shots will be provided for 10 million people aged 65 or above with chronic illnesses by the SGK.

The flu and pregnant women

Flu is more likely to cause severe illness in pregnant women than in other women. Pregnant women are more prone to severe forms of the flu, as well as hospitalization and even death due to changes in the immune system, heart and lungs during pregnancy.

There can be a greater chance of complications in pregnancy when the virus is contracted, such as miscarriage or premature birth, so getting a flu shot is the first and most important step in protecting against flu during this period. A flu shot administered during pregnancy has been shown to protect both the mother and her baby (up to six months) from flu, excluding the nasal spray vaccine, which is thought to pose a risk to the mother's health and the health of the unborn child.

Contrary to general belief, flu shots are a safe way to protect a pregnant woman and her unborn child from serious illness and complications due to influenza. The flu shot has been given to millions of pregnant women over many years and has not been shown to cause harm to pregnant women or their babies.

#6

Stop smoking to add 9 years to life 

Women can add nine years to their lives by quitting smoking before the age of 40 but still face a 20-percent higher death rate than those who never smoked, a study said Oct. 27.

Published in The Lancet, a survey of nearly 1.2 million women in Britain showed that smoking throughout adulthood chopped on average 11 years off lifespan. These results echoed the findings of earlier research conducted on men.

Among women who kicked the habit before the age of 40, the researchers measured an average lifespan gain of more than nine years compared with those who never stopped.

For those who quit before 30 the gains were even bigger, about 10 years. “Whether they are men or women, smokers who stop before reaching middle age will on average gain about an extra 10 years of life,” study co-author Richard Peto of the University of Oxford said. But the paper warned this did not mean that it was safe to continue smoking until 40 before quitting.

“Women who do so have throughout the next few decades [of their lives] a mortality rate 1.2 times that of never-smokers. This is a substantial excess risk, causing one in six of the deaths among these ex-smokers.”

Extensive probe

The Lancet study is one of the most extensive probes into the impacts of smoking on this generation of women, the first likely to have smoked substantially throughout their adult lives.

The research is part of a vast survey that enrolled 1.2 million women in the UK between 1996 and 2001. The volunteers were asked to detail their smoking history, and were followed for an average of 12 years. 

#7

Green tea lowers cancer diseases

Older women who regularly drink green tea may have slightly lower risks of colon, stomach and throat cancers than women who make no time for tea, a large study suggests.

Researchers found that of more than 69,000 Chinese women followed for a decade, those who drank green tea at least three times a week were 14 percent less likely to develop a cancer of the digestive system.

That mainly meant lower odds of colon, stomach and esophageal cancers.

No one can say whether green tea, itself, is the reason. Green-tea lovers are often more health-conscious in general.

The study did try to account for that, said senior researcher Dr. Wei Zheng, who heads epidemiology at Vanderbilt University School of Medicine in Nashville.

None of the women smoked or drank alcohol regularly. And the researchers collected information on their diets, exercise habits, weight and medical history.

Even with those things factored in, women’s tea habits remained linked to their cancer risks, Zheng noted.

Still, he said in an email, this type of study cannot prove cause-and-effect. 

#8

Turkey becomes the centre of marrow transplants

Chairman of Foundation of Geriatric Haematology and Lecturer at the University of Ankara’s Department of Haematology, Prof Dr. Osman Ilhan, has said that patients from neighbouring countries prefer to come to Turkey because Turkey has been successful at the marrow transplants.

Dr Ilhan told AA on Tuesday that Turkey has been successful lately over the field of health and stated that the bone marrow transplant is one of the developing areas in the Turkish health sector.

Ilhan stressed that the number of people who demand the marrow transplant and the quality of the operations had grown and said, "In 2003, the number of marrow transplant operations was 300 however it has reached three thousand now. Not just the number of operations, also the quality of it have grown as well. Turkish haematology’s marrow transplant operations and the stem cell transplantations reached the international levels. Patients from Iraq, Iran, Romania and Bulgaria come to Turkey for the transplantation. They prefer to come to Turkey as the cost of operations is lower and Turkish doctors achieve successful results."

Professor Ilhan added, "Also units of the marrow transplants at the private hospitals in Turkey have achieved remarkable successes. That is why we became an international player in the health industry. We also would like to achieve the same success over treatments of the cancer of glands and leukaemia."

Ilhan stated that they are also treating local patients as well as patients who come from abroad. 

#9

Study Reveals Alarming Levels of Drug-Resistant Tuberculosis

Alarming levels of extensively drug-resistant tuberculosis have been found around the world. A new study says the findings signal an urgent need for improved testing and the development of better drugs to fight the deadly lung infection.

Researchers from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, tested samples from more than 1,200 TB patients from eight countries who were classified as having multi-drug resistant tuberculosis. The infection was resistant to one or both of the older, first-line drugs, rifampacin and isoniazid.

But investigators found 6.7 percent of the patients were infected with extensively drug resistant TB, known as XDR. The XDR-TB patients did not respond to a regimen that included the first-line treatments, and quinolone drugs and newer injectable drugs.

Investigator Tracy Dalton, of the CDC’s Division of TB Elimination, led the study. “So, what this presents is a really worrying trend in increasing XDR in the world,” she said.

Before the study, the World Health Organization estimated that just more than five percent of all resistant cases of TB were XDR.

Dalton says resistance to at least one newer anti-TB drug was detected in 44 percent of the patients, ranging from 33 percent in Thailand to more than 60 percent in Latvia. Other countries in the study were Estonia, the Philippines, Russia, South Africa, South Korea and Peru.

Dalton says the increased availability of newer tuberculosis drugs increases the likelihood they are not taken as prescribed, which causes the TB bacterium to become less sensitive to the stronger drugs. Dalton says the biggest predictor of whether someone in the study was infected with XDR TB was whether they had previously been treated for tuberculosis.

“What we found in many of these sites is that there was resistance to all of these second-line drugs. And we need more drugs to be available, and that is a high priority in TB control right now,” Dalton said.

Dalton says it is critical to take immediate steps to contain the spread of extensively drug resistant tuberculosis, including building more and better lab facilities to test for TB.

“There is a lot going on in molecular testing of drug resistance, which would be a rapid diagnosis of these patients,” Dalton said.

Since Dalton’s study, the WHO has revised its estimate of the number of global XDR-TB cases upward, to 10 percent of all patients diagnosed with drug-resistant tuberculosis.

A study on extensively drug -resistant tuberculosis by Tracy Dalton and colleagues at the Centers for Disease Control is published in the journal The Lancet.

#10

World No Tobacco Day today

According to the World Health Organization, tobacco kills nearly six million people each year, more than five million of whom are users or ex users. At least 600,000 of these deaths are due to exposure to second-hand smoke.

Though tobacco consumption is decreasing in some high- and upper-middle income countries, it is increasing globally in low- and middle-income countries where the burden of disease is already disproportionately high. Having caused 100 million deaths in the 20th century, current trends project an increase to up to a billion deaths in the 21st.

The good news is that health benefits of quitting smoking can be seen almost immediately and continue exponentially the longer one abstains. Heart rate and blood pressure drop within 20 minutes of quitting, carbon monoxide level in the blood drops to normal within 12 hours, the risk of coronary heart disease is about half that of a smoker after 12 months of abstention, and risks of lung, throat, mouth, esophagus, bladder, cervix and pancreas cancer continue to decrease the longer you do not smoke.


