#1

Obama vs Romney on Foreign Policy 
Defense spending

President Obama, as a result of a 2011 deficit reduction agreement, could face an automatic federal budget cut of more than $100 billion at the end of the year if there is no compromise agreement with Republicans.  The plan, known as sequestration, slows the rate of U.S. defense spending.  During the foreign policy presidential debate, Obama said his military budget proposal would not be "reducing" spending but "maintaining" it.  He accused Romney of proposing military spending that had not been sought by military leaders.  

Romney wants to reverse what he calls "Obama-era defense cuts."  The former Massachusetts governor said his goal would be to set core defense spending, which includes funds for military personnel operations, procurement and research and development, at a minimum of 4 percent of the U.S. gross domestic product. During an October presidential debate, Romney defended his plans to build a larger military by cutting spending on government programs, including the president's health care plan which critics call "Obamacare."

Iran

Obama said his administration has shown strength by enforcing what he calls the "toughest, most crippling sanctions" ever on Iran as part of international efforts to deter Iran from its alleged nuclear weapons goal.  He said the United States will not perpetually engage in nuclear negotiations with Tehran that go nowhere and that the U.S. would only accept an agreement that ends Iran's nuclear program.  The president said Romney's proposals on Iran are not that different from what he has already done.  

Romney has said Iran's nuclear program is the United States' greatest threat.  He pledged to work with Congress and U.S. allies to implement new and broader economic sanctions against Iran and tighten existing sanctions.  Romney has also said he would push for greater diplomatic isolation.  During the October debates, the Republican challenger said Obama's policies had brought the U.S. "four years closer to a nuclear Iran."

Foreign conflict

The role of the United States in the Afghan conflict was a key issue during the 2008 presidential election. Then-senator Obama visited Afghanistan during his campaign.  With U.S. involvement in the conflict growing less popular with voters, Obama has pledged to end U.S. combat operations by 2014.  On Syria, Obama wants international pressure to be exerted on President Bashar al-Assad's government.  He has expressed reservations about arming rebels, saying "we have to be absolutely certain of who were are helping." In Libya, Obama has pledged to find those responsible for the September attack on the U.S. consulate in Benghazi that killed four Americans.  

Romney, like Obama, supports ending U.S. combat operations in Afghanistan by 2014. Romney, however, has said the withdrawal should be based by conditions on the ground, as assessed by U.S. military commanders.  On Syria, he has proposed a three-part strategy that includes increasing sanctions targeting the Syrian government, working with Syrian defectors and intelligence resources to prevent the export of Syrian weapons of mass destruction and facilitating efforts to supply arms to "responsible members of the opposition."  Romney has criticized Obama for what he called a "lack of security" leading up to the September raid in Benghazi.

China

The president sought a more conciliatory approach towards China and has stopped short of calling Beijing a currency manipulator. In an October presidential debate, Obama said his administration had a record of winning trade violation cases against China. He said he would continue to press Beijing on currency issues and would insist that China plays by "the same rules as everyone else."  

The Republican challenger has branded China a currency manipulator and has also accused Beijing of stealing U.S. intellectual property and patents and counterfeiting U.S. goods.  Romney says he will pursue policies that will discourage what he calls "imbalanced trade relations" between China and its neighbors. Romney has also said he favors maintaining and expanding the U.S. naval presence in the Western pacific region, in part to discourage any Chinese aggression against its neighbors.

Israel

Obama has expressed a desire for a resumption of peace talks between Israel and the Palestinians.  He has called on both sides to base talks on borders that were in place in the West Bank and East Jerusalem before the territories were captured by Israel in a 1967 war. The president has chastised Israel for continued settlement building in disputed areas, but he has said his administration has ramped up security cooperation with Israel.

Romney has said as president, his first foreign trip would be to Israel.  He has accused Obama of alienating the Jewish state, and has said he would work with Turkey and Egypt to shore up what he calls "fraying" relations with Israel.  Romney said he supports a Palestinian state, but would reduce assistance to Palestinians if they continue to pursue United Nations statehood recognition or if they form a unity government that includes Hamas, which is considered a terrorist group by the United States and Israel. 

#2

Clinton Urges Albanians to Safeguard Parliamentary Elections 
 U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Clinton spoke to Albania's parliament Thursday, urging politicians to ensure that next year's parliamentary elections are free and fair.

At Albania's centennial, Secretary Clinton said it is remarkable to think of all that the country has experienced in the past century -- invasions, occupation, Communist dictatorship, and isolation: a people without opportunities or political or social freedoms, unable to leave to find them elsewhere.

Now a NATO ally moving toward full integration in Europe, Clinton said Albania must continue working to strengthen its democracy, build its economy, and create a future equal to the aspirations of its people.

In a speech to Albania's parliament, she said the coming months will be critical, starting with ensuring that next June's parliamentary vote is free and fair.

"So I urge not only leaders of Albania but the people, the citizens of Albania, to work hard to make this next election a success that reflects the depth of your commitment to democracy," said Clinton.

For Albanian democracy to thrive, Clinton said leaders need to build a culture of cooperation that transcends political differences.

"Hold different political beliefs," she said. "Believe that you would be a better leader than the other person. That's what politics is about. You wouldn't be doing it if you didn't believe that about yourself. But at the end, putting individual interests and party interests behind national interests is what democratic leaders are called to do."

As she often does in remarks to young democracies, Clinton recounted the ferocity of her election campaign battle with President Barack Obama and how she then agreed to serve as his secretary of state.

She called on Albanian leaders to fight corruption because it is a cancer that eats away at societies.

"It drains resources. It blocks economic growth. It shields incompetent and unethical leaders. And perhaps worst of all, it creates a culture of impunity that saps people of their will to improve their own lives and communities," said Clinton.

She said rooting out corruption demands a constant effort and a shared commitment across political differences.

Albania is the last stop on a trip that has taken Clinton to Algeria, Bosnia, Serbia, Kosovo and Croatia. 

#3

US elections 2012
Obama hits the campaign trail in Wisconsin for final run to election day

After suspending his campaign for four days because of Sandy, Barack Obama arrives in Wisconsin for the start of a punishing sprint across America ahead of election day Link to this video

Barack Obama reached out to undecided voters with a plea for national unity in the aftermath of superstorm Sandy as he embarked Thursday on a punishing sprint across America ahead of election day.

After suspending his campaign for four days because of Sandy, Obama sought to make up the lost time, flying to Wisconsin for the start of 17 stops in the eight swing states through to Monday.

On the first campaign stop, in Green Bay, he portrayed the response to the storm as an example of how Americans could put aside their political differences to come together in time of crisis.

It was a message designed to appeal to independent voters who like the idea of bipartisanship, which has been largely missing in Washington for the last four years.

Obama faces potentially bad news Friday when the last set of unemployment figures are released. After dropping to 7.8% last month, any rise could dominate the final days of the campaign, tilting what remains of the tiny group of undecided voters towards Mitt Romney.

Romney, who resumed campaigning day earlier, made the economy and unemployment a big part of his final pitch. "If the president were to be re-elected, we're going to see high levels of unemployment continue," he said.

An Obama spokeswoman, Jen Psaki, asked about the figures yesterday, said: "Regardless what they are, the president is going to feel there's more we need to do to help people get back to work."

The Obama team is hoping that any poor unemployment figures will be more than compensated for by the plaudits Obama has won this week for his handling of Sandy.

The president, looking more confident and with more vigour than he has throughout most of the campaign, told a small crowd gathered near the steps of Air Force One at an airport in Green Bay that America had been inspired by what it had witnessed this week.

"All the petty differences that consume us in normal times all seem to melt away. There are no Democrats or Republicans during a storm, there are just fellow Americans," the president said.

The line is a reprise of the plea for bipartisan cooperation that saw him rise to national prominence after a speech to the Democratic convention in 2004 and that he used repeatedly in the 2008 campaign.

"Leaders of different parties working to fix what's broken. neighbours helping neighbours cope with tragedy; communities rallying to rebuild; a spirit that says, in the end, we're all in this together -– that we rise or fall as one nation, as one people."

Both the Obama and Romney campaigns claim they are winning. National polls show the two tied but of 11 polls published yesterday/Thurs in the eight swing states that will decide the election Obama is ahead in eight, Romney in two and the other a dead heat.

The election could hinge on Ohio, a volatile and unpredictable state in which Obama holds a small lead, up two points in the Real Clear Politics average of polls.

The Republican challenger enjoyed a surge in support after his success against Obama in the first of the presidential debates on October 3, regularly attracting crowds of 10,000 or more, but in the aftermath of Sandy these have dropped away. The crowd at his first event in Virginia yesterday attracted fewer than 3,000.

Some Republicans are rehearsing excuses if they lose, such as blaming Sandy.

The former Republican governor of Mississippi, Haley Barbour, emailed Politico to say: "One thing is obvious – for a period of three days or more, nobody on the news media was reporting anything about the economy or job, spending, deficits or debts. And that's the Obama campaign's dream."

In Green Bay, Obama shifted quickly from talking about Sandy to making his closing argument, a reprise of the stump speech he had been giving before Sandy.

He described Romney as "using all his talents as a salesman" in trying to sell the same policies of George W Bush that had created the economic mess and that he would rubberstamp Tea Party policies.

Obama's bipartisanship message is aimed not just at independents but Congress, hoping that a victory for him might persuade Republicans who control the House to cooperate in working out a deal in the face of an impending economic crisis.

Although the White House is careful to avoid any accusations of complacency, work is underway on post-election priorities. The White House spokesman, Jay Carney, briefing reporters, refused to discuss specifics beyond saying that the administration is always working on budget issues. The big problem looming is a face-off with Congress over tackling the 'fiscal cliff', major spending cuts to reduce the burgeoning deficit.

"The president has said and believes that after the election we will be able to come together in a bipartisan way to resolve these issues and to deal with our deficit and debt challenge with a balanced proposal that reflects an overwhelming consensus among experts and the American people about how we should get this done. And he looks forward to tackling those issues after the election," Carney said.

Romney, in his first speech of the day in Virginia, stuck too to his stump speech, reprising an anecdotes about Boy Scouts, the song America the Beautiful and lines from a fictional football team in the show Friday Night Lights in which there was a rallying cry on the way out of the locker room: "clear eyes, full hearts, can't lose". Romney is persisting with the latter in spite of complaints from the show's writer.

#4

No hunger striker in critical condition, Ministry of Justice says
The Ministry of Justice released a statement on Friday saying that no inmates on a widespread hunger strike are in critical condition, a day after Turkey's main medical association said the strikers may start dying within the next 10 days.

The statement said there are 682 hunger strikers in 67 jails across the country and that the strikers are being examined by doctors every day. The ministry also denied allegations that it rejected the prisoners' request that they be given lemon, water and sugar instead of food.

The hunger strike entered its 52nd day on Friday, with some 700 Kurdish prisoners refusing food in dozens of prisons across Turkey, demanding major improvements in the prison conditions of jailed Kurdistan Workers' Party (PKK) leader Abdullah Öcalan, the right to receive education in their mother tongue and the right to address courts in Kurdish.

The inmates are consuming sugar, water and vitamins, which will prolong their lives and the protest by weeks.

The protests follow a surge in violence between Turkey and the PKK, which took up arms 28 years ago to try to carve out a Kurdish homeland in Turkey's Southeast and which is designated a terrorist group by Ankara, the United States and the European Union.

"Our worry is that after around 40 days, lasting damage may occur and after 60 days deaths may begin,” Özdemir Aktan, head of the Turkish Medical Association (TTB), which represents 80 percent of the nation's doctors, said on Thursday.

Aktan's remarks came during a meeting at a hotel in İstanbul's Taksim Square of intellectuals and representatives of nongovernmental organizations who called on the government to listen to the demands of the hunger strikers.

On Friday, Human Rights Association (İHD) President Öztürk Türkdoğan denied the ministry's claim that all strikers were in good health, saying that some were displaying serious symptoms of dehydration. He said the strike has been in place for 52 days, a dangerously long period. He also said TTB members were not being allowed in, appealing to the Ministry of Justice to cooperate with the TTB.

Health Minister Recep Akdağ on Friday responded to questions from the press about the hunger strike during a meeting about childhood leukemia. “They are examined by doctors at times when they allow medical examinations. We are closely monitoring the issue.” He said the hunger strikes were a delicate topic and responsibility fell on all parties. “Those who are trying to exploit this as a political issue, for their own political interests, are in the wrong. The inmates that are being forced into this should be encouraged to stop these acts.”

Iraqi politicians have also commented on the hunger strikes. Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK) spokesperson Azad Jundiyan, in a written statement released on Friday, said, “Problems should be solved through dialogue in a democratic way.” He also said the PUK was exerting efforts for a solution. “We are watching with concern to establishment of peace in Turkey, the hunger strike and armed conflict in Turkey. Problems should be solved through dialogue in a democratic way.”

In related developments, Bursa Governor Şahabettin Harput said 14 people were detained as part of an investigation into violence that broke earlier this week in the province during a Peace and Democracy Party (BDP) demonstration in support of the hunger strikes. Harput said the investigation was continuing, with more detentions likely.

Turkish Nobel laureate Orhan Pamuk, who was in London on Friday to attend a literary conversation on his book “Sessiz Ev,” recently translated into English by Robert Finn as “Silent House,” said he couldn't see the hunger strike issue being resolved easily or soon, in response to a question on the subject.

Most of the strikers are in jail on charges of membership of the Kurdistan Communities' Union (KCK) or the PKK. Hundreds, including Kurdish journalists, have been jailed in an investigation into the KCK, which prosecutors say is an umbrella organization in Turkey.

In a related development, European Commissioner for Enlargement Stephan Füle responded to a question submitted by three members of the European Parliament in September. The question demanded to know the commission's opinion on the KCK trial, as part of which 100 journalists are in jail.

Füle said the commission was following the KCK case closely. He said the commission has previously expressed concerns regarding the KCK case, but said a fourth judicial reform package likely to be introduced soon will address the concerns regarding Kurds and freedom of speech. “The commission is hopeful a fourth judicial reform package, announced by the government, will be put on Parliament's agenda rapidly and that it will address the concerns referred to above. The commission further assesses the KCK case and respect for freedom of expression in its 2012 Progress Report on Turkey, which was presented to the European Parliament on Oct. 10,” Füle said in his written response.

#5

Turkey to request Patriot deployment from NATO 

Turkey plans to officially request NATO deploy a Patriot missile defense system in its territories as a security precaution against a potential large-scale military offensive from Syria as Syrian shelling on the border raises tensions.

“We have been closely working with NATO on contingency plans regarding the developments in Syria and these plans also include the deployment of missile defense systems in Turkey,” a senior Turkish diplomatic source said Oct. 30. “We are planning to make this request in the case of escalation of the scale of attacks against us.”

Turkey has invoked Article 4 of the NATO treaty twice, which provides for consultations, after the downing of its jet and the killing of five Turkish citizens in a Syrian shelling, but took no action in pursuing Article 5, which considers an attack against one member an attack against all. “We have received sufficient support from NATO so far. The last statement NATO issued after the Akçakale incident was very powerful. We continue to be in close dialogue with the alliance,” the source said.

Turkey has requested the deployment of Patriot missile defense systems twice in the past, both in the context of the Iraqi war in the early 1990s and 2000s. In both cases they were deployed by the Netherlands, as only a few countries have such missile systems. “I would not be surprised if Turkey would soon make such a request,” a diplomat from a NATO country said. “The situation is getting worse in Syria, and it’s the right of Turkey to take necessary security measures.”

The Turkish diplomatic source dismissed claims that Turkey would ask to use NATO’s early warning radar system located in the Kürecik province of Malatya in Eastern Anatolia, because Turkey’s national radar system was capable of tracing Syrian missiles.

Turkish diplomatic sources have also fiercely reacted against U.S. Army Europe and Seventh Army Lt. Gen. Mark Hertling’s comments last week that it is not clear who is shooting shells from Syria into Turkey. “We are not sure if these shells are from the Syrian army, from rebels who want to get Turkey involved in the issue or from the outlawed PKK (Kurdistan Workers’ Party),” he said.

The source said, “The bombs that landed in Turkey show they are Russian-made Douchka bombs. What he said is really ridiculous.” 

#6


Head of forensics denies reports of poison in former president's body 

An autopsy report on late President Turgut Özal has yet to be finished, the head of the Forensic Medicine Institute said today, dismissing claims that evidence had been found indicating that the ex-head of state had been poisoned.
 
The statement followed earlier reports by daily Bugün that claimed a poisonous substance had been found in samples taken from the body, leading to suspicions the leader may have been poisoned. The claim was reportedly based on an autopsy report conducted on Özal's body.
 
But Forensic Medicine Institute head Haluk İnce said the institute had yet to finalize the report.
 
"The report is not even finished yet. Our work continues. We have several results that are out, but we are in the process of confirming thousands of results through repeated procedures. We haven't sent anyone any reports yet," İnce said.
 
"We do not know how that story was formed," İnce said. "We did not find the substance claimed to have been found.  We are not the source of the story."
 
Earlier reports by Bugün claimed to have obtained an autopsy report conducted on Özal that confirmed the presence of the poisonous chemical strychnine keratin in his body. 
 
As part of the Ankara Prosecution office's investigation, Özal’s body was exhumed from his grave earlier this year in order for samples to be collected for the investigation.
 
Özal, Turkey's eighth president, died on April 17, 1993.
 
"The public should not pay attention to such stories," İnce said. 

#7

Mortar bomb fired from Syria kills five Turkish people

A mortar bomb fired from Syria landed in a residential district of the southeastern town of Akcakale, Turkey, killing five and wounding at least 13 other people yesterday afternoon.

As a result, Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan changed his schedule and met with relevant ministers and their advisors. Erdogan was also informed by Chief of General Staff Gen. Necdet Ozel and Sanliurfa Governor Celalettin Guvenc.

Foreign Minister Ahmet Davutoglu also canceled his official meetings, convened the Foreign Ministry bureaucrats and held separate phone conversations with UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon, UN and Arab League Special Envoy to Syria Lakhdar Brahimi, NATO Secretary General Anders Fogh Rasmussen and US Secretary of State Hillary Clinton to brief them about the incident and the ensuing developments.

Following these international phone talks, Davutoglu proceeded to the Prime Ministry Official Residence to hold a comprehensive evaluation meeting with Erdogan, Gen. Ozel, Deputy Prime Ministers Bekir Bozdag and Besir Atalay, Justice Minister Sadullah Ergin, Interior Minister Idris Naim Sahin and the Deputy Chief of General Staff Gen. Hulusi Akar. During the meeting, Turkey’s rights stemming from the international law were discussed.

#8

Topbas announces location of new airport to be constructed in Istanbul

Istanbul Metropolitan Municipality Mayor Kadir Topbas said yesterday that a tender would be held in 2012 to build the third airport in the northern part of Istanbul.

Topbas said that the capacity of the airport would be 100 million passengers, noting that if necessary, fifth and sixth runways could be added later, increasing the passenger capacity to 150 million.

Topbas added that the new airport would be constructed near Terkos Lake in the north of Istanbul.

#9

Turkey’s Republic Day reception covered by the New York Times

The reception which was hosted by President Abdullah Gul and Hayrunnisa Gul on the occasion of Turkey’s Republic Day which is celebrated on October 29 was covered in an article by The New York Times.

“At a reception on Monday evening at the president’s mansion to celebrate Turkey’s founding 89 years ago, something previously unheard of occurred: the country’s top military commander stood alongside the wives of the president and prime minister, even while the women wore Islamic headscarves,” the article wrote, adding, “In years past the military elite would never have stood beside women wearing a symbol long at the center of Turkey’s struggle over the role of religion in public life. These men were heirs to the traditions of Turkey’s secularist founder, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, who zealously banished religion from public life.”

Tim Arago, writer of the article, also wrote the following: “At a time when Turkey’s prosperity and its melding of democratic and Islamic values are being put forward as a model for an Arab world in turmoil, the country is facing its own internal power struggles -- between Islamists and secularists, civilian leaders and military commanders. The outcome could not only determine the future of Turkey but, as it takes on a greater role in the affairs of the Middle East, also shape the region.”

#10


Myanmar crisis may turn into ‘terrorism’ 

Communal bloodshed in western Myanmar risks developing into “armed terrorist acts,” the government said Oct. 31, after security forces were targeted by homemade firearms in deadly fighting.

Myanmar said 180 guns were seized during the new wave of clashes between Buddhists and Muslims in Rakhine state, which has killed dozens, displaced tens of thousands and seen whole neighborhoods razed.

It said several people had been arrested on suspicion of making the weapons. “The clashes between two communities are likely to turn from normal unrest to armed terrorist acts after the security forces were attacked with handmade guns,” the government said. Myanmar said both local and international organizations were “involved” in the conflict, without elaborating on their identities or exact role.

Meanwhile, refugee organizations said Myanmar’s neighbors should prepare to accept refugees from the Rohingya community who may try to flee abroad to escape bloody communal violence.

“We are appealing to countries to keep borders open and to ensure safe access and whatever assistance they can provide,” said Vivian Tan, Asia-Pacific spokeswoman for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. “The main thing is that they have a safe place to land,” she said. Human Rights Watch warned this week of a potential “dramatic increase in the number of Rohingya Muslims taking to the sea this year” in the wake of the unrest. 
