#1

Chelsea investigating apparent 'monkey' gesture made by supporter

Chelsea have launched an investigation after a photograph emerged of a supporter appearing to make a racist gesture towards a Manchester United player.

The image shows a fan making what has been described as a "monkey" gesture during Wednesday night's Capital One Cup match between the two clubs at Stamford Bridge.

The Metropolitan police have confirmed they have also launched an investigation into the incident after a complaint was received, adding: "There have been no arrests and enquiries continue."

A statement from the club read: "Chelsea Football Club can confirm we are investigating an incident involving a member of the crowd at last night's game against Manchester United.

"The club will be examining all available footage and asks anyone who can identify the individual to contact the club.

"Chelsea FC is committed to removing all forms of discrimination and if we have sufficient evidence we will take the strongest possible action, including supporting criminal prosecution."

This latest issue comes at a sensitive time for Chelsea, with the club having lodged a formal complaint with the Football Association against the referee Mark Clattenburg for using "inappropriate language" towards the midfielder Mikel Jon Obi. Clattenburg maintains his innocence.

Chelsea are also understood to be looking into a number of incidents concerning United fans after objects were thrown onto the pitch during the match and a pitch invasion involving away supporters.

#2

Turkish junior women beat Serbia to claim European volleyball title 

Turkish national junior women volleyball team beat Serbia 25-21, 25-22, 25-18 in Ankara yesterday, to claim the trophy at the 2012 European Junior Women Championship.

The top scorer of the match was Serbia’s captain Bianka Busa with 15 kills, whilst Kübra Akman scored 12 times for Turkey. The home squad booked 10 aces, Serbia only four.

The Turkish squad, which brings together players born in 1994 and 1995, also won the 2011 European Youth Volleyball Championship, as well as the 2011 Volleyball Girls’ Youth World Championship.

Coach Gökhan Edman said his players did a fantastic job. “They followed our game plan from the start until the end. I would like to congratulate my staff members and the Turkish volleyball federation for the great efforts they made.”

Well prepared

Captain Damla Çakıroğlu said the team was well prepared for the challenge. “We were ready for today’s game. We prepared very well. I guess, we played a great tournament and deserved the gold medal.”

Serbia coach Ratko Pavlicevic congratulated the Turkish team.” They were the better team today,” he said. “Thank you for hosting us, it was an outstanding event.”

Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdoğan called Turkish Volleyball Federation chief Erol Ünal Karabıyık to congratulate him on the title.Buoyed by the support of thousands of fans in the stands, Turkey started the match confidently, taking a deserved 8-5 lead at the first technical break.

Turkey keeps cool

Turkey put a lot of pressure on the Serbian passers, but could not stop Serbia bouncing back at 12-12. However, Turkey kept cool to regain momentum by the second technical time-out (16-13). Ceylan Arısan brought up set point with a quick combination on the right hand side, before Turkish setter Çağla Akın blocked Nikolina Lukic to give the host a hard-earned 1-0 set lead.

However, Serbia came back strongly. At the first technical time-out in the second set, the Eastern Europeans already led 8-3. Captain Bianka Busa added some impressive winners to her scorers chart and the two Serbian middle-blockers Mina Popovic and Jelena Trnic were insurmountable at the net. At the second technical break, Serbia was still five points ahead. Turkey tried to take advantage of the imprecise passing of Serbian libero Nadica Dragutinovic, but her teammates helped her with some remarkable offensive actions. Nevertheless, Turkey came closer with six consecutive points to turn the tables at 19-17. It was the turning point of the second set. Turkey never looked back, with Kübra Akman closing it out for the home squad at 25-22.

The story of the game didn’t change in the third set. Turkey jumped out for an 8-5 lead at the first technical stop. Serbia still struggled with passing, forcing setter Sladjana Mirkovic to slow down her game. As a consequence, the Turkish defense players showed some brilliant back court play. At the second technical time-out, the scoreboard already displayed a seven-point gap in Turkey’s favor.

Çakıroğlu smashed for 21-13, before Akman blocked for a 23-16 Turkish lead a few rallies later. Aktaş brought up match point with an impressive winner on the right, before a Serbian net touch bounced the Turkish ladies into heaven. 

#3

Arsenal recovers from 4 down at Reading to win 7-5 in League Cup

Arsenal staged a stunning League Cup fightback at Reading after trailing 4-0 in the first half on Tuesday, advancing to the quarterfinals with a 7-5 extra-time victory after Theo Walcott scored a hat trick.

Walcott netted in injury time in both halves, and then in the last minute of extra time as well in a game that always seemed to offer up a new twist.

“It was an unbelievable game. I'm absolutely knackered now,” Walcott said. “We've scored seven goals away from home -- it was great going forward. Maybe defensively it wasn't great at times, but we're in the draw and that's what matters.”

Arsenal's performance in the first half was so poor that some Gunners fans left the stadium after the team conceded a fourth goal in the 37th minute as Reading dominated against its Premier League rival.

But after Walcott pulled one back just before halftime, he took the game into extra time with a last-gasp equalizer in the sixth minute of stoppage time. Substitute Olivier Giroud had netted the second for Arsenal and Laurent Koscielny, who earlier scored an own goal, made it 4-3 in the 89th.

Marouane Chamakh put Arsenal ahead for the first time in extra time with his first goal in almost a year, but Reading drew level again when Pavel Pogrebnyak made it 5-5 with four minutes to go.

Walcott then completed his hat trick by slotting in a rebound from Andrei Arshavin's effort, and Chamakh lobbed goalkeeper Adam Federici in the closing exchanges to ensure Arsenal advanced.

“You always see new things in our game, that's why it's never boring,” Arsenal manager Arsene Wenger said. “It was a tennis match today. They had a fantastic start, we were not sharp and it was 4-0 and could have been one or two more. ... You cannot play for Arsenal and give up.”

Reading manager Brian McDermott was aggrieved that Walcott's goal that took the game into extra time came more than five minutes into stoppage time when only four had been signaled by the fourth official.

“If it's four minutes, you don't mind another 30 seconds but not another two minutes,” McDermott said. “I was waiting for him to blow his whistle but he'll have his reasons. ... What happened tonight was extraordinary.”

On a thrilling night for English football's second-tier knockout competition, three Premier League clubs - Southampton, Sunderland and Wigan - were beaten by lower-league opposition.

The biggest shock came at Wigan where fourth-tier club Bradford won a penalty shootout 4-2 after the match ended 0-0.

Premier League struggler Southampton exited after losing 3-0 to Leeds of the League Championship.

Goals from Michael Tonge and El-Hadji Diouf as well as Luciano Becchio's penalty kick steered Leeds into the quarterfinals for the first time since 1996.

“We didn't perform anywhere near what's expected of a Southampton Football Club team,” said Southampton manager Nigel Adkins, who made 11 changes from the side that lost to Tottenham on Sunday.

“Forty-eight hours ago we had a high-intensity game and I made the relevant changes. I take full responsibility,” he said. “We wanted to play tomorrow, but the powers that be wanted it to be tonight. But we gave the players who have not been in the team to the chance to show what they could do, and they did not take it.”

Middlesbrough advanced after Scott McDonald's goal secured a 1-0 victory at northeast rival Sunderland.

“It was really disappointing,” Sunderland manager Martin O'Neill said. “We started off brightly in the game but Middlesbrough forced their way into the game and in truth we didn't create enough.”

It was a nervy night for Aston Villa, which only eliminated third-tier club Swindon 3-2 after Christian Benteke's 90th minute goal.

Villa appeared to be cruising to victory after goals from Benteke and Gabriel Agbonlahor before halftime. 

#4

Fan frenzy greets star golfers Woods and McIlroy in China 

Rory McIlroy beat Tiger Woods by a single shot in the Duel at Jinsha Lake in China yesterday in a high quality showdown before a frenzied audience that came to greet the world’s top two.

Having flown in late on Oct. 28 night, McIlroy and Woods had any tiredness quickly extinguished by a surreal and lavish opening ceremony.

They were greeted by drum majorettes, fireworks and speeches from local dignitaries before clanging a ceremonial Chinese gong and having their handprints and autographs immortalized in clay, Hollywood-style appropriately for McIlroy, who was brought up in Holywood, Belfast.

World number one McIlroy carded a five under par 67 on the 7,039-yard, par-72 layout at Jinsha Lake Golf Club, with world number two and 14 times major winner Woods registering a 68.
China is seen as the next great market for golf to conquer in its global expansion, and the fans clearly love it though are mostly oblivious to the etiquette of the game, demonstrated amply when they broke through the ropes and invaded the driving range as McIlroy and Woods warmed up.
“This is certainly not like most Mondays,” said Woods afterwards, smiling. “It’s been a different one, hasn’t it?”
“I wouldn’t say it was crazy out there. The word I would use is ‘enthusiastic’,” said McIlroy. “It’s good to see so many people out there. So many people that follow golf and want to watch us play. I hope that continues.” 

#5

Chinese stars hope to shine in Shanghai

Skating duo Pang Qing and Tong Jian are hoping a home crowd will propel them to glory at the Cup of China, the third event on the ISU Grand Prix tour that begins today.

China’s Olympic silver medalists enter the three-day event in Shanghai as favorites to take the pairs title. Pang and Tong won silver at the 2012 Skate America last month, but are expected to go one better at Shanghai’s Oriental Sports Centre to secure their place in next month’s final.

“The most important goal for us in Shanghai is to win the ticket to the final. We want the gold medal here,” Tong told state-run China Radio International.

“I hope all the Chinese skaters will have a good performance here in the home rink.”

Reigning European Champions Nathalie Pechalat and Fabian Bourzat are top seeds in the ice dance category, while Skate America silver medalists Ekaterina Bobrova and Dmitri Soloviev from Russia are expected to give a strong performance.

Men’s world silver medalist Daisuke Takahashi and two-time women’s World Champion Mao Asada lead a particularly strong Japanese team.

Japan’s Skating Federation decided last week to take part in the event following concerns of simmering anti-Japan sentiment in the host country over a long-running territorial row between Beijing and Tokyo. 

#6

Serena overpowers Sharapova in WTA Champs final 

Serena Williams beat Maria Sharapova today to win the year-ending WTA Championships tournament in Istanbul after a final that brought the two biggest stars in women's tennis. 

American tennis star Williams beat her Russian rival in two sets (6-4, 6-3) at the Sinan Erdem Dome in Istanbul. "The Turkish fans are amazing," Serena said in front of a sold-out crowd.

"I've never seen so many signs in support of me." The crowd, however, was not equally welcoming for Istanbul Mayor Kadir Topbaş, Transportation Minister Binali Yıldırım and Family Minister Fatma Şahin, who were jeered and booed when stepping on the court during the award ceremony. The win capped an illustrious year for Williams, third-ranked player in women's tennis. She had come to Istanbul at the end of a tennis season, where she also won the Wimbledon, US Open titles in addition to the Olympic women’s gold medal.

In a rematch of the Olympic final in London, Williams took control of the game after she broke the Russian's serve to take a 3-2 lead, and then went on to win the first set.  

Williams increased her domination in the second set, starting the set with breaking the serve. Both players hung on to their serves until the end of the set, but Williams finished the game with a break.Second-ranked Sharapova, on the other hand, had a successful season as well, having won the French Open title.

The Russian superstar had an otherwise great week, having beaten Victoria Azarenka of Belarus, the top-ranked player, in the semifinal.Earlier, Russian duo Maria Kirilenko and Nadia Petrova outlasted their Czech opponents Andrea Hlavackova and Lucie Hradecka in two sets (6-1, 6-4) in the doubles’ final. 

#7

Fernando Alonso says Ferrari are still in F1 hunt but must improve speed

There are some pursuers who are not particularly distinguished, like the Keystone Cops, and others who hunt down their quarry with the relentlessness of a bounty hunter.

Fernando Alonso, it can be assumed, belongs to the latter category. A little while ago he was the hunted. But since he has been caught and passed by Sebastian Vettel he has sought to regain his advantage with a ferocity of will that might yet unnerve the men from Red Bull.

For most of the season he has driven a car that has not been a match for the Red Bull or the McLaren for that matter. At the beginning of the season it was a dog. But Alonso, the driver of the season so far, has won races and earned podium positions to which he had no entitlement – the true sign of a great driver.

He has been outscored 100-48 by the German in the past four races. But after splitting the Red Bulls he said on Sunday: "There are 75 points and we are 13 behind and we know we need to improve. We are not fast enough, especially on Saturday, but we can improve the situation in Abu Dhabi or USA. I think Brazil will be quite good and hopefully I am going to be happy.

"As we saw with Mark [Webber] with the Kers problem, it can happen to Seb or it can happen to me, so I am optimistic. I think it is good news for us, seeing that we could fight Red Bull in the race. We need to be closer to them in qualifying. At the moment we are not able to win."

Vettel has led every lap of the past three races and the last man to do that was Ayrton Senna in 1989. He remains the outstanding favourite but the blob of Ferrari red in his rear view will not go away.

After the 26th victory of his short but astonishing career Vettel agreed he had one hand on the trophy but reminded everyone that the other hand was Alonso's.

Vettel said: "I was able to brake a little bit late and have quite a good exit out of turn three, which was important for the remainder of the race, and then was able to open a gap, not just to Mark but also to the cars behind and obviously control the race from there. I think we were very competitive on the soft tyres; on the hard tyres I think McLarens and Ferrari were pretty competitive.

"I think it's been an incredible two years for us, both times to come here and win the race, get the pole on Saturday and win the race on Sunday is fantastic.

"There's always a very nice trophy so I'm very, very happy to pick up another one this year. I don't know what it is about this circuit but I really like the flow of it. Sector one is a bit slow with long straights but sector two and three are really nice and I think we all enjoy it."

It was another disappointing performance from the Mercedes team, who failed to score a point. Michael Schumacher suffered a puncture early on and never recovered and Nico Rosberg finished 11th.

Schumacher also escaped a penalty for ignoring blue flags. He was investigated for impeding Romain Grosjean during the race at the Buddh International Circuit. But after both drivers talked to the stewards it was decided that Schumacher had not deliberately held up the Lotus driver.

Meanwhile Formula One's chief executive, Bernie Ecclestone, is ready to welcome the French Grand Prix back on to the calendar for next year. Ecclestone said: "As far as I am concerned, yes. I am hoping. We are ready to sign. We have a pen and are ready to sign."

Following the postponement of next year's inaugural race in New Jersey it had seemed the schedule might consist of only 19 events. But Ecclestone revealed on Sunday that a replacement was possible and France, which has not staged a race since 2008, is the favourite to get the nod.

#8

Lindsay Vonn bids to continue dominance of women’s skiing 

Lindsey Vonn’s statement of intent for the coming season is more than clear: she’s ready to race against the men...

The sport’s world governing body, the International Ski Federation (FIS), will not likely allow that, but it stands as testament to the American’s continuing dominance of the women’s disciplines on the circuit.
FIS will officially decide early next month whether Vonn can race against the men in the Canadian resort of Lake Louise, her proviso being that she must be able to race the women’s series of races a week later.

“If it’s not possible to do the women’s World Cup race in Lake Louise, then I definitely won’t race with the men either,” Vonn said.

The FIS answer is likely to be a resounding no, given that she would be given an unfair advantage if she has a longer time training and racing on the same slope.

Vonn, 28, last year claimed her fourth overall title in five seasons based on her strengths in the speed disciplines of the super-G and downhill, as well as a breakthrough win in the giant slalom.

53 Worl Cup victories

Her season-long assault took her to 53 World Cup wins and 97 podiums.

Only retired duo Annemarie Moser-Proell of Austria, with 62, and Switzerland’s Vreni Schneider (55) have more victories, records that will surely fall should Vonn maintain her form and steer clear of injury.
Her one blip on the World Cup circuit came in 2011 when she lost the overall title to close friend Maria Hoefl-Riesch of Germany by the tiny margin of three points.

The men’s overall title last season went down to the wire, Austria’s Marcel Hirscher just outpointing Switzerland’s Beat Feuz in the final event.

This season, featuring 37 races and bissected by the Feb. 5-17 World Ski Championships in the Austrian resort of Schladming, starts this weekend in nearby Soelden, and will be notable for the absence of Swiss veteran Didier Cuche.

The overall title could again come down to a dogfight between Hirscher, Feuz, Norwegian stalwart Aksel Lund Svindal and Croatian Ivica Kostelic.

Kostelic (2011), Swiss Carlo Janka (2010), Svindal (2007, 2009) and American Bode Miller (2008) have taken the crystal globes home in recent years, while Feuz is considered the up and coming racer.

Technical changes

There have been technical changes enforced on manufacturers by the FIS for the coming season, and the reaction from skiers and ski-makers has been very mixed. Ski lengths, which differ for each event and are dictated by the FIS, have increased while the width of the skis have been reduced. FIS implemented the changes in a bid to make the skis “more physical”, requiring the skier to work harder to execute turns and, as a result, slowing them down in a bid to make the sport safer to a degree.

Austrian racer Hans Grugger’s gruesome wipe-out on the downhill ski run in Kitzbuehel last January again highlighted the risks of a sport that ranks as one of the most dangerous to participate in.
Gradients there are in excess of 85 percent in places and skiers can hit 140 kph and travel a full 80 meters on the jumps that litter the energy-draining 3.3-kilometer-long course.

Grugger joined Daniel Albrecht of Switzerland (2009) and American Scott Macartney (2008) as the latest high-profile casualty of the Streif downhill course, modified after the latter’s crash.

Teams acknowledge that ski racing has become much safer over the years, with the introduction of marked courses, and better safety nets and crash pads along the piste.

But that goes in tandem with the increased professionalism among ski racing’s upper echelons and the vast improvement in equipment.

#9

Women’s basketball season off with arch rivals meeting

The new season in women’s basketball starts tonight as Fenerbahçe and Galatasaray renew their rivalry.
Turkish Women’s Basketball League (TKBL) champion Fenerbahçe takes on Spor Toto Women’s Turkish Cup winner Galatasaray in tonight’s Presidential Cup at the Ankara Sports Hall.

“We will face a very important opponent at the very beginning of the season,” Galatasaray coach Ekrem Memnun said during a press conference yesterday. “It is an important meeting as a real tune-up event before the league campaign.”

Both teams, who have played in virtually every final in women’s basketball in recent years, will play tonight’s game with major changes to both teams since last season. Fenerbahçe parted ways with Greek coach George Dikeoulakos and signed Roberto Iniguez De Heredia of Spain for the head coach job.

Important meeting
“It is important for us to start the season with a win,” De Heredia said. “We will do our best for the win.”
The Yellow Canaries also signed Belarusian forward Anastasiya Verameyenka from Nadezhda Orenburg, Polish forward Agnieszka Bibrzycka from CCC Polkowice and Turkish guard Esra Şencebe from Beşiktaş.
Galatasaray, who suffered a disappointing defeat to its archrival in last season’s TKBL finals series, had bigger changes in its squad.

The Lions signed Spanish forward Sancho Lyttle and Belgian center Ann Wauters from Euroleague champion Ros Casares along with American guard Lindsay Whalen from ZVVZ USK Prague. The three players perform for the Atlanta Dream, the Seattle Storm and the Minnesota Lynx respectively in the Women’s National Basketball Association (WNBA) in the United States.

Another big transfer move for Galatasaray was the return of Nevriye Yılmaz, who was with the Lions for their last Turkish league title in 2001. Arguably the most successful player in Turkish women’s basketball history, the 32-year-old center had won seven consecutive league titles with Fenerbahçe from 2006 to 2012.

Galatasaray and Fenerbahçe played in four different competitions last season. Galatasaray beat its archrival to the title in the President’s Cup and Turkish Cup finals, but Fenerbahçe emerged triumphant in the Turkish League. The two rivals also met in the Euroleague Top 8, which was organized in Istanbul in March, and saw Fenerbahçe beat Galatasaray in the semifinal round.

Fenerbahçe eventually finished fourth in the Top 8 while Galatasaray finished fifth.

This is the seventh time the two rivals will meet in the Presidential Cup final with both teams winning three times.

The game starts at 7 p.m. and will be televised live on Sky Türk 360.

#10

Turks lead groups in topflight Euroleague

The three teams representing Turkey in the topflight European basketball competition Euroleague -- Fenerbahçe Ülker, Anadolu Efes and Beşiktaş -- gained top position in their groups as a result of their second matches.

On Friday, Fenerbahçe Ülker stunned Slovenian side Union Olimpija 81-75 on the road following a crisis regarding Fenerbahçe's Central African Republic shooting guard Romain Sato's entry into the country. Sato was detained for trying to enter Slovenia with a forged passport and was sent back to Turkey.

Fenerbahçe led the first quarter 25-20 while Union Olimpija was up 46-43 at halftime. With three minutes left to the third quarter, the İstanbul side took the upper hand and never looked back. The Turkish team took a 63-61 lead in the third quarter and wrapped the game up 81-75 to become the leader of Group A. Also on Friday, Anadolu Efes trounced Greek side Olympiakos 98-72 in İstanbul in their Group C encounter. Efes maintained its dominance throughout the game, leading the first quarter 30-13, the second 54-32, the third 74-57 and set the score with a 26-point difference in the final quarter: 98-72. Despite competing in the topnotch league for the first time, Beşiktaş was unstoppable in the two opening weeks. On Friday, the İstanbul team defeated German champions Brose Baskets 86-71 on the road to lead Group D.
 


